# Django 1.8.10 release notes

*March 1, 2016*

Django 1.8.10 fixes two security issues and several bugs in 1.8.9.

## CVE-2016-2512: Malicious redirect and possible XSS attack via user-supplied redirect URLs containing basic auth

Django relies on user input in some cases (e.g.
`django.contrib.auth.views.login()` and [i18n](../topics/i18n/index.md))
to redirect the user to an “on success” URL. The security check for these
redirects (namely `django.utils.http.is_safe_url()`) considered some URLs
with basic authentication credentials “safe” when they shouldn’t be.

For example, a URL like `http://mysite.example.com\@attacker.com` would be
considered safe if the request’s host is `http://mysite.example.com`, but
redirecting to this URL sends the user to `attacker.com`.

Also, if a developer relies on `is_safe_url()` to provide safe redirect
targets and puts such a URL into a link, they could suffer from an XSS attack.

## CVE-2016-2513: User enumeration through timing difference on password hasher work factor upgrade

In each major version of Django since 1.6, the default number of iterations for
the `PBKDF2PasswordHasher` and its subclasses has increased. This improves
the security of the password as the speed of hardware increases, however, it
also creates a timing difference between a login request for a user with a
password encoded in an older number of iterations and login request for a
nonexistent user (which runs the default hasher’s default number of iterations
since Django 1.6).

This only affects users who haven’t logged in since the iterations were
increased. The first time a user logs in after an iterations increase, their
password is updated with the new iterations and there is no longer a timing
difference.

The new `BasePasswordHasher.harden_runtime()` method allows hashers to bridge
the runtime gap between the work factor (e.g. iterations) supplied in existing
encoded passwords and the default work factor of the hasher. This method
is implemented for `PBKDF2PasswordHasher`  and `BCryptPasswordHasher`.
The number of rounds for the latter hasher hasn’t changed since Django 1.4, but
some projects may subclass it and increase the work factor as needed.

A warning will be emitted for any [third-party password hashers that don’t
implement](../topics/auth/passwords.md#write-your-own-password-hasher) a `harden_runtime()` method.

If you have different password hashes in your database (such as SHA1 hashes
from users who haven’t logged in since the default hasher switched to PBKDF2
in Django 1.4), the timing difference on a login request for these users may be
even greater and this fix doesn’t remedy that difference (or any difference
when changing hashers). You may be able to [upgrade those hashes](../topics/auth/passwords.md#wrapping-password-hashers) to prevent a timing attack for that case.

## Bugfixes

* Fixed a crash on PostgreSQL that prevented using `TIME_ZONE=None` and
  `USE_TZ=False` ([#26177](https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/26177)).
* Added system checks for query name clashes of hidden relationships
  ([#26162](https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/26162)).
* Made `forms.FileField` and `utils.translation.lazy_number()` picklable
  ([#26212](https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/26212)).
* Fixed [`RangeField`](../ref/contrib/postgres/fields.md#django.contrib.postgres.fields.RangeField) and
  [`ArrayField`](../ref/contrib/postgres/fields.md#django.contrib.postgres.fields.ArrayField) serialization with
  `None` values ([#26215](https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/26215)).
* Reallowed dashes in top-level domain names of URLs checked by
  `URLValidator` to fix a regression in Django 1.8 ([#26204](https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/26204)).
* Fixed `BoundField` to reallow slices of subwidgets ([#26267](https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/26267)).
* Prevented `ContentTypeManager` instances from sharing their cache
  ([#26286](https://code.djangoproject.com/ticket/26286)).
