# Django 2.1 release notes

*August 1, 2018*

Welcome to Django 2.1!

These release notes cover the [new features](#whats-new-2-1), as well as
some [backwards incompatible changes](#backwards-incompatible-2-1) you’ll
want to be aware of when upgrading from Django 2.0 or earlier. We’ve
[dropped some features](#removed-features-2-1) that have reached the end of
their deprecation cycle, and we’ve [begun the deprecation process for some
features](#deprecated-features-2-1).

See the [How to upgrade Django to a newer version](../howto/upgrade-version.md) guide if you’re updating an existing
project.

## Python compatibility

Django 2.1 supports Python 3.5, 3.6, and 3.7. Django 2.0 is the last version to
support Python 3.4. We **highly recommend** and only officially support the
latest release of each series.

<a id="whats-new-2-1"></a>

## What’s new in Django 2.1

### Model “view” permission

A “view” permission is added to the model [`Meta.default_permissions`](../ref/models/options.md#django.db.models.Options.default_permissions). The new permissions will be
created automatically when running [`migrate`](../ref/django-admin.md#django-admin-migrate).

This allows giving users read-only access to models in the admin.
[`ModelAdmin.has_view_permission()`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#django.contrib.admin.ModelAdmin.has_view_permission) is new. The implementation is backwards
compatible in that there isn’t a need to assign the “view” permission to allow
users who have the “change” permission to edit objects.

There are a couple of [backwards incompatible considerations](#view-permission-backwards-incompatible).

### Minor features

#### [`django.contrib.admin`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#module-django.contrib.admin)

* [`ModelAdmin.search_fields`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#django.contrib.admin.ModelAdmin.search_fields) now accepts any lookup such as
  `field__exact`.
* jQuery is upgraded from version 2.2.3 to 3.3.1.
* The new [`ModelAdmin.delete_queryset()`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#django.contrib.admin.ModelAdmin.delete_queryset) method allows customizing the
  deletion process of the “delete selected objects” action.
* You can now [override the default admin site](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#overriding-default-admin-site).
* The new [`ModelAdmin.sortable_by`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#django.contrib.admin.ModelAdmin.sortable_by) attribute and
  [`ModelAdmin.get_sortable_by()`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#django.contrib.admin.ModelAdmin.get_sortable_by) method allow limiting the columns that
  can be sorted in the change list page.
* The `admin_order_field` attribute for elements in
  [`ModelAdmin.list_display`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#django.contrib.admin.ModelAdmin.list_display) may now be a query expression.
* The new [`ModelAdmin.get_deleted_objects()`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#django.contrib.admin.ModelAdmin.get_deleted_objects) method allows customizing
  the deletion process of the delete view and the “delete selected” action.
* The `actions.html`, `change_list_results.html`, `date_hierarchy.html`,
  `pagination.html`, `prepopulated_fields_js.html`, `search_form.html`,
  and `submit_line.html` templates can now be [overridden per app or
  per model](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#admin-templates-overridden-per-app-or-model) (besides overridden
  globally).
* The admin change list and change form object tools can now be
  [overridden per app, per model, or globally](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#admin-templates-overridden-per-app-or-model) with
  `change_list_object_tools.html` and `change_form_object_tools.html`
  templates.
* [`InlineModelAdmin.has_add_permission()`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#django.contrib.admin.InlineModelAdmin.has_add_permission) is now passed the parent object
  as the second positional argument, `obj`.
* Admin actions may now [specify permissions](../ref/contrib/admin/actions.md#admin-action-permissions)
  to limit their availability to certain users.

#### [`django.contrib.auth`](../topics/auth/index.md#module-django.contrib.auth)

* [`createsuperuser`](../ref/django-admin.md#django-admin-createsuperuser) now gives a prompt to allow bypassing the
  [`AUTH_PASSWORD_VALIDATORS`](../ref/settings.md#std-setting-AUTH_PASSWORD_VALIDATORS) checks.

#### [`django.contrib.gis`](../ref/contrib/gis/index.md#module-django.contrib.gis)

* The new [`GEOSGeometry.buffer_with_style()`](../ref/contrib/gis/geos.md#django.contrib.gis.geos.GEOSGeometry.buffer_with_style) method is a version of
  [`buffer()`](../ref/contrib/gis/geos.md#django.contrib.gis.geos.GEOSGeometry.buffer) that allows customizing the style of the
  buffer.
* [`OpenLayersWidget`](../ref/contrib/gis/forms-api.md#django.contrib.gis.forms.widgets.OpenLayersWidget) is now based on
  OpenLayers 4.6.5 (previously 3.20.1).

#### [`django.contrib.sessions`](../topics/http/sessions.md#module-django.contrib.sessions)

* Added the [`SESSION_COOKIE_SAMESITE`](../ref/settings.md#std-setting-SESSION_COOKIE_SAMESITE) setting to set the `SameSite`
  cookie flag on session cookies.

#### Cache

* The [local-memory cache backend](../topics/cache.md#local-memory-caching) now uses a
  least-recently-used (LRU) culling strategy rather than a pseudo-random one.
* The new [`touch()`](../topics/cache.md#django.core.cache.cache.touch) method of the [low-level
  cache API](../topics/cache.md#low-level-cache-api) updates the timeout of cache keys.

#### CSRF

* Added the [`CSRF_COOKIE_SAMESITE`](../ref/settings.md#std-setting-CSRF_COOKIE_SAMESITE) setting to set the `SameSite`
  cookie flag on CSRF cookies.

#### Forms

* The widget for `ImageField` now renders with the HTML attribute
  `accept="image/*"`.

#### Internationalization

* Added the [`get_supported_language_variant()`](../ref/utils.md#django.utils.translation.get_supported_language_variant)
  function.
* Untranslated strings for territorial language variants now use the
  translations of the generic language. For example, untranslated `pt_BR`
  strings use `pt` translations.

#### Management Commands

* The new [`inspectdb --include-views`](../ref/django-admin.md#cmdoption-inspectdb-include-views) option allows creating models
  for database views.
* The [`BaseCommand`](../howto/custom-management-commands.md#django.core.management.BaseCommand) class now uses a custom help
  formatter so that the standard options like `--verbosity` or `--settings`
  appear last in the help output, giving a more prominent position to
  subclassed command’s options.

#### Migrations

* Added support for serialization of `functools.partialmethod` objects.
* To support frozen environments, migrations may be loaded from `.pyc` files.

#### Models

* Models can now use `__init_subclass__()` from [**PEP 487**](https://peps.python.org/pep-0487/).
* A `BinaryField` may now be set to `editable=True` if you wish to include
  it in model forms.
* A number of new text database functions are added:
  [`Chr`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.Chr),
  [`Left`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.Left),
  [`LPad`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.LPad),
  [`LTrim`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.LTrim),
  [`Ord`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.Ord),
  [`Repeat`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.Repeat),
  [`Replace`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.Replace),
  [`Right`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.Right),
  [`RPad`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.RPad),
  [`RTrim`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.RTrim), and
  [`Trim`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.Trim).
* The new [`TruncWeek`](../ref/models/database-functions.md#django.db.models.functions.TruncWeek) function truncates
  [`DateField`](../ref/models/fields.md#django.db.models.DateField) and
  [`DateTimeField`](../ref/models/fields.md#django.db.models.DateTimeField) to the Monday of a week.
* Query expressions can now be negated using a minus sign.
* [`QuerySet.order_by()`](../ref/models/querysets.md#django.db.models.query.QuerySet.order_by) and [`distinct(*fields)`](../ref/models/querysets.md#django.db.models.query.QuerySet.distinct)
  now support using field transforms.
* [`BooleanField`](../ref/models/fields.md#django.db.models.BooleanField) can now be `null=True`. This is
  encouraged instead of `NullBooleanField`, which will likely be deprecated
  in the future.
* The new [`QuerySet.explain()`](../ref/models/querysets.md#django.db.models.query.QuerySet.explain) method displays the database’s execution
  plan of a queryset’s query.
* [`QuerySet.raw()`](../ref/models/querysets.md#django.db.models.query.QuerySet.raw) now supports [`prefetch_related()`](../ref/models/querysets.md#django.db.models.query.QuerySet.prefetch_related).

#### Requests and Responses

* Added [`HttpRequest.get_full_path_info()`](../ref/request-response.md#django.http.HttpRequest.get_full_path_info).
* Added the `samesite` argument to [`HttpResponse.set_cookie()`](../ref/request-response.md#django.http.HttpResponse.set_cookie) to allow
  setting the `SameSite` cookie flag.
* The new `as_attachment` argument for [`FileResponse`](../ref/request-response.md#django.http.FileResponse)
  sets the `Content-Disposition` header to make the browser ask if the user
  wants to download the file. `FileResponse` also tries to set the
  `Content-Type` and `Content-Length` headers where appropriate.

#### Templates

* The new [`json_script`](../ref/templates/builtins.md#std-templatefilter-json_script) filter safely outputs a Python object as JSON,
  wrapped in a `<script>` tag, ready for use with JavaScript.

#### Tests

* Added test [`Client`](../topics/testing/tools.md#django.test.Client) support for 307 and 308 redirects.
* The test [`Client`](../topics/testing/tools.md#django.test.Client) now serializes a request data
  dictionary as JSON if `content_type='application/json'`. You can customize
  the JSON encoder with test client’s `json_encoder` parameter.
* The new [`SimpleTestCase.assertWarnsMessage()`](../topics/testing/tools.md#django.test.SimpleTestCase.assertWarnsMessage) method is a simpler
  version of [`assertWarnsRegex()`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html#unittest.TestCase.assertWarnsRegex).

<a id="backwards-incompatible-2-1"></a>

## Backwards incompatible changes in 2.1

### Database backend API

This section describes changes that may be needed in third-party database
backends.

* To adhere to [**PEP 249**](https://peps.python.org/pep-0249/), exceptions where a database doesn’t support a
  feature are changed from [`NotImplementedError`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#NotImplementedError) to
  [`django.db.NotSupportedError`](../ref/exceptions.md#django.db.NotSupportedError).
* Renamed the `allow_sliced_subqueries` database feature flag to
  `allow_sliced_subqueries_with_in`.
* `DatabaseOperations.distinct_sql()` now requires an additional `params`
  argument and returns a tuple of SQL and parameters instead of an SQL string.
* `DatabaseFeatures.introspected_boolean_field_type` is changed from a method
  to a property.

### [`django.contrib.gis`](../ref/contrib/gis/index.md#module-django.contrib.gis)

* Support for SpatiaLite 4.0 is removed.

### Dropped support for MySQL 5.5

The end of upstream support for MySQL 5.5 is December 2018. Django 2.1 supports
MySQL 5.6 and higher.

### Dropped support for PostgreSQL 9.3

The end of upstream support for PostgreSQL 9.3 is September 2018. Django 2.1
supports PostgreSQL 9.4 and higher.

### Removed `BCryptPasswordHasher` from the default `PASSWORD_HASHERS` setting

If you used bcrypt with Django 1.4 or 1.5 (before
`BCryptSHA256PasswordHasher` was added in Django 1.6), you might have some
passwords that use the `BCryptPasswordHasher` hasher.

You can check if that’s the case like this:

```default
from django.contrib.auth import get_user_model

User = get_user_model()
User.objects.filter(password__startswith="bcrypt$$")
```

If you want to continue to allow those passwords to be used, you’ll
have to define the [`PASSWORD_HASHERS`](../ref/settings.md#std-setting-PASSWORD_HASHERS) setting (if you don’t already)
and include `'django.contrib.auth.hashers.BCryptPasswordHasher'`.

### Moved `wrap_label` widget template context variable

To fix the lack of `<label>` when using `RadioSelect` and
`CheckboxSelectMultiple` with `MultiWidget`, the `wrap_label` context
variable now appears as an attribute of each option. For example, in a custom
`input_option.html` template, change `{% if wrap_label %}` to
`{% if widget.wrap_label %}`.

### `SameSite` cookies

The cookies used for `django.contrib.sessions`, `django.contrib.messages`,
and Django’s CSRF protection now set the `SameSite` flag to `Lax` by
default. Browsers that respect this flag won’t send these cookies on
cross-origin requests. If you rely on the old behavior, set the
[`SESSION_COOKIE_SAMESITE`](../ref/settings.md#std-setting-SESSION_COOKIE_SAMESITE) and/or [`CSRF_COOKIE_SAMESITE`](../ref/settings.md#std-setting-CSRF_COOKIE_SAMESITE)
setting to `None`.

<a id="view-permission-backwards-incompatible"></a>

### Considerations for the new model “view” permission

#### Custom admin forms need to take the view-only case into account

With the new “view” permission, existing custom admin forms may raise errors
when a user doesn’t have the change permission because the form might access
nonexistent fields. Fix this by overriding [`ModelAdmin.get_form()`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#django.contrib.admin.ModelAdmin.get_form) and
checking if the user has the “change” permissions and returning the default
form if not:

```default
class MyAdmin(admin.ModelAdmin):
    def get_form(self, request, obj=None, **kwargs):
        if not self.has_change_permission(request, obj):
            return super().get_form(request, obj, **kwargs)
        return CustomForm
```

#### New default view permission could allow unwanted access to admin views

If you have a custom permission with a codename of the form
`view_<modelname>`, the new view permission handling in the admin will allow
view access to the changelist and detail pages for those models. If this is
unwanted, you must change your custom permission codename.

### Miscellaneous

* The minimum supported version of `mysqlclient` is increased from 1.3.3 to
  1.3.7.
* Support for SQLite < 3.7.15 is removed.
* The date format of `Set-Cookie`’s `Expires` directive is changed to
  follow [**RFC 7231 Section 7.1.1.1**](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231.html#section-7.1.1.1) instead of Netscape’s cookie standard.
  Hyphens present in dates like `Tue, 25-Dec-2018 22:26:13 GMT` are removed.
  This change should be merely cosmetic except perhaps for antiquated browsers
  that don’t parse the new format.
* `allowed_hosts` is now a required argument of private API
  `django.utils.http.is_safe_url()`.
* The `multiple` attribute rendered by the
  [`SelectMultiple`](../ref/forms/widgets.md#django.forms.SelectMultiple) widget now uses HTML5 boolean syntax
  rather than XHTML’s `multiple="multiple"`.
* HTML rendered by form widgets no longer includes a closing slash on void
  elements, e.g. `<br>`. This is incompatible within XHTML, although some
  widgets already used aspects of HTML5 such as boolean attributes.
* The value of [`SelectDateWidget`](../ref/forms/widgets.md#django.forms.SelectDateWidget)’s empty options is
  changed from 0 to an empty string, which mainly may require some adjustments
  in tests that compare HTML.
* [`User.has_usable_password()`](../ref/contrib/auth.md#django.contrib.auth.models.User.has_usable_password) and the
  [`is_password_usable()`](../topics/auth/passwords.md#django.contrib.auth.hashers.is_password_usable) function no longer
  return `False` if the password is `None` or an empty string, or if the
  password uses a hasher that’s not in the [`PASSWORD_HASHERS`](../ref/settings.md#std-setting-PASSWORD_HASHERS) setting.
  This undocumented behavior was a regression in Django 1.6 and prevented users
  with such passwords from requesting a password reset. Audit your code to
  confirm that your usage of these APIs don’t rely on the old behavior.
* Since migrations are now loaded from `.pyc` files, you might need to delete
  them if you’re working in a mixed Python 2 and Python 3 environment.
* Using `None` as a `django.contrib.postgres.fields.JSONField` lookup
  value now matches objects that have the specified key and a null value rather
  than objects that don’t have the key.
* The admin CSS class `field-box` is renamed to `fieldBox` to prevent
  conflicts with the class given to model fields named “box”.
* Since the admin’s `actions.html`, `change_list_results.html`,
  `date_hierarchy.html`, `pagination.html`,
  `prepopulated_fields_js.html`, `search_form.html`, and
  `submit_line.html` templates can now be overridden per app or per model,
  you may need to rename existing templates with those names that were written
  for a different purpose.
* `QuerySet.raw()` now caches its results like regular querysets. Use
  `iterator()` if you don’t want caching.
* The database router [`allow_relation()`](../topics/db/multi-db.md#allow_relation) method is called in more cases.
  Improperly written routers may need to be updated accordingly.
* Translations are no longer deactivated before running management commands.
  If your custom command requires translations to be deactivated (for example,
  to insert untranslated content into the database), use the new
  [@no_translations decorator](../howto/custom-management-commands.md#management-commands-and-locales).
* Management commands no longer allow the abbreviated forms of the
  `--settings` and `--pythonpath` arguments.
* The private `django.db.models.sql.constants.QUERY_TERMS` constant is
  removed. The [`get_lookup()`](../ref/models/lookups.md#django.db.models.lookups.RegisterLookupMixin.get_lookup)
  and [`get_lookups()`](../ref/models/lookups.md#django.db.models.lookups.RegisterLookupMixin.get_lookups) methods
  of the [Lookup Registration API](../ref/models/lookups.md#lookup-registration-api) may be
  suitable alternatives. Compared to the `QUERY_TERMS` constant, they allow
  your code to also account for any custom lookups that have been registered.
* Compatibility with `py-bcrypt` is removed as it’s unmaintained. Use
  [bcrypt](https://pypi.org/project/bcrypt/) instead.

<a id="deprecated-features-2-1"></a>

## Features deprecated in 2.1

### Miscellaneous

* The `ForceRHR` GIS function is deprecated in favor of the new
  [`ForcePolygonCW`](../ref/contrib/gis/functions.md#django.contrib.gis.db.models.functions.ForcePolygonCW) function.
* `django.utils.http.cookie_date()` is deprecated in favor of
  [`http_date()`](../ref/utils.md#django.utils.http.http_date), which follows the format of the latest
  RFC.
* `{% load staticfiles %}` and `{% load admin_static %}` are deprecated
  in favor of `{% load static %}`, which works the same.
* `django.contrib.staticfiles.templatetags.static()` is deprecated in favor
  of `django.templatetags.static.static()`.
* Support for [`InlineModelAdmin.has_add_permission()`](../ref/contrib/admin/index.md#django.contrib.admin.InlineModelAdmin.has_add_permission) methods that don’t
  accept `obj` as the second positional argument will be removed in Django
  3.0.

<a id="removed-features-2-1"></a>

## Features removed in 2.1

These features have reached the end of their deprecation cycle and are removed
in Django 2.1. See [Features deprecated in 1.11](1.11.md#deprecated-features-1-11) for details, including how
to remove usage of these features.

* `contrib.auth.views.login()`, `logout()`, `password_change()`,
  `password_change_done()`, `password_reset()`, `password_reset_done()`,
  `password_reset_confirm()`, and `password_reset_complete()` are removed.
* The `extra_context` parameter of `contrib.auth.views.logout_then_login()`
  is removed.
* `django.test.runner.setup_databases()` is removed.
* `django.utils.translation.string_concat()` is removed.
* `django.core.cache.backends.memcached.PyLibMCCache` no longer supports
  passing `pylibmc` behavior settings as top-level attributes of `OPTIONS`.
* The `host` parameter of `django.utils.http.is_safe_url()` is removed.
* Silencing of exceptions raised while rendering the `{% include %}` template
  tag is removed.
* `DatabaseIntrospection.get_indexes()` is removed.
* The `authenticate()` method of authentication backends requires `request`
  as the first positional argument.
* The `django.db.models.permalink()` decorator is removed.
* The `USE_ETAGS` setting is removed. `CommonMiddleware` and
  `django.utils.cache.patch_response_headers()` no longer set ETags.
* The `Model._meta.has_auto_field` attribute is removed.
* `url()`’s support for inline flags in regular expression groups (`(?i)`,
  `(?L)`, `(?m)`, `(?s)`, and `(?u)`) is removed.
* Support for `Widget.render()` methods without the `renderer` argument
  is removed.
