# Clickjacking Protection

The clickjacking middleware and decorators provide easy-to-use protection
against [clickjacking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clickjacking). This type of attack occurs when a malicious site
tricks a user into clicking on a concealed element of another site which they
have loaded in a hidden frame or iframe.

## An example of clickjacking

Suppose an online store has a page where a logged-in user can click “Buy Now”
to purchase an item. A user has chosen to stay logged into the store all the
time for convenience. An attacker site might create an “I Like Ponies” button
on one of their own pages, and load the store’s page in a transparent iframe
such that the “Buy Now” button is invisibly overlaid on the “I Like Ponies”
button. If the user visits the attacker’s site, clicking “I Like Ponies” will
cause an inadvertent click on the “Buy Now” button and an unknowing purchase of
the item.

<a id="clickjacking-prevention"></a>

## Preventing clickjacking

Modern browsers honor the [X-Frame-Options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Frame-Options) HTTP header that indicates whether
or not a resource is allowed to load within a frame or iframe. If the response
contains the header with a value of `SAMEORIGIN` then the browser will only
load the resource in a frame if the request originated from the same site. If
the header is set to `DENY` then the browser will block the resource from
loading in a frame no matter which site made the request.

Django provides a few ways to include this header in responses from your site:

1. A middleware that sets the header in all responses.
2. A set of view decorators that can be used to override the middleware or to
   only set the header for certain views.

The `X-Frame-Options` HTTP header will only be set by the middleware or view
decorators if it is not already present in the response.

## How to use it

### Setting `X-Frame-Options` for all responses

To set the same `X-Frame-Options` value for all responses in your site, put
`'django.middleware.clickjacking.XFrameOptionsMiddleware'` to
[`MIDDLEWARE`](settings.md#std-setting-MIDDLEWARE):

```default
MIDDLEWARE = [
    ...,
    "django.middleware.clickjacking.XFrameOptionsMiddleware",
    ...,
]
```

This middleware is enabled in the settings file generated by
[`startproject`](django-admin.md#django-admin-startproject).

By default, the middleware will set the `X-Frame-Options` header to
`DENY` for every outgoing `HttpResponse`. If you want any other value for
this header instead, set the [`X_FRAME_OPTIONS`](settings.md#std-setting-X_FRAME_OPTIONS) setting:

```default
X_FRAME_OPTIONS = "SAMEORIGIN"
```

When using the middleware there may be some views where you do **not** want the
`X-Frame-Options` header set. For those cases, you can use a view decorator
that tells the middleware not to set the header:

```default
from django.http import HttpResponse
from django.views.decorators.clickjacking import xframe_options_exempt


@xframe_options_exempt
def ok_to_load_in_a_frame(request):
    return HttpResponse("This page is safe to load in a frame on any site.")
```

#### NOTE
If you want to submit a form or access a session cookie within a frame or
iframe, you may need to modify the [`CSRF_COOKIE_SAMESITE`](settings.md#std-setting-CSRF_COOKIE_SAMESITE) or
[`SESSION_COOKIE_SAMESITE`](settings.md#std-setting-SESSION_COOKIE_SAMESITE) settings.

### Setting `X-Frame-Options` per view

To set the `X-Frame-Options` header on a per view basis, Django provides
these decorators:

```default
from django.http import HttpResponse
from django.views.decorators.clickjacking import xframe_options_deny
from django.views.decorators.clickjacking import xframe_options_sameorigin


@xframe_options_deny
def view_one(request):
    return HttpResponse("I won't display in any frame!")


@xframe_options_sameorigin
def view_two(request):
    return HttpResponse("Display in a frame if it's from the same origin as me.")
```

Note that you can use the decorators in conjunction with the middleware. Use of
a decorator overrides the middleware.

## Limitations

The `X-Frame-Options` header will only protect against clickjacking in
[modern browsers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Frame-Options#browser_compatibility).
